Update spec to hide nonces using a range proof (#53)
chris-wood/draft-arc: draft-ietf-privacypass-arc-crypto.md

  presentationProof = MakePresentationProof(U, UPrimeCommit, m1Commit, tag, generatorT,
                                                   state.credential, V, r, z, nonce,
                                                   nonceBlinding, nonceCommit, state.presentationLimit)

  presentation = (U, UPrimeCommit, m1Commit, tag, nonceCommit, presentationProof)

  # This step mutates the state by incrementing the nextNonce by 1.
  state.nextNonce += 1

  return state, nonce, presentation
~~~

OPEN ISSUE: should the tag also fold in the presentation limit?

The resulting presentation can be serialized as follows. See {{presentation-proof}}
for more details on the generation of the presentation proof. The presentation proof
integrates the range proof as described in {{range-proof}}.

~~~
struct {
  uint8 U[Ne];
  uint8 UPrimeCommit[Ne];
  uint8 m1Commit[Ne];
  uint8 tag[Ne];
  uint8 nonceCommit[Ne];
  PresentationProof presentationProof;
} Presentation

struct {
  uint8 D[k][Ne];
  uint8 challenge[Ns];
  // Variable length based on presentation variables plus range proof variables
  uint8 responses[5 + 3 * k][Ns];
} PresentationProof

> k = ceil(log2(presentationLimit))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
struct {
  uint8 D[k][Ne]; // k = ceil(log2(presentationLimit))
  uint8 challenge[Ns];
  // Variable length based on presentation variables plus range proof variables
  uint8 responses[5 + 3 * k][Ns];
} PresentationProof
```

  - X2: Element, server public key 2.
- requestContext: Data, context for the credential request.
- presentationContext: Data (public), used for presentation tag computation.
- presentation:
  - U: Element, re-randomized from the U in the response.
  - UPrimeCommit: Element, a public key to the issued UPrime.
  - m1Commit: Element, a public key to the client secret (m1).
  - tag: Element, the tag element used for enforcing the presentation limit.
  - nonceCommit: Element, a Pedersen commitment to the nonce.

>   - presentationProof: ZKProof, a joint proof of correct generation of the presentation and that the committed nonce is in [0, presentationLimit). This proof includes D, an array of commitments to the bit decomposition of the nonce.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - presentationProof: ZKProof, a joint proof of correct generation of the presentation and that the committed nonce is in [0, presentationLimit).
```

  # simplified: encUPrime = b * X0 + t1 * m1Enc + t2 * m2Enc, since t1 = b * x1 and t2 = b * x2
  verifier.Constrain(encUPrimeVar, [(bVar, X0Var), (t1Var, m1EncVar), (t2Var, m2EncVar)])

  return verifier.Verify(response.responseProof)
~~~

## Presentation Proof {#presentation-proof}

The presentation proof is a proof of knowledge of (m1, r, z, nonce, nonceBlinding) used in the presentation, as well as a proof that nonce is in the range [0, presentationLimit).

Statements to prove:

~~~
# The m1 commitment was correctly formed
1. m1Commit = m1 * U + z * generatorH
# Other presentation elements are consistent with the credential
2. V = z * X1 - r * generatorG
# The nonceCommit is a Pedersen commitment to nonce with blinding factor nonceBlinding
3. nonceCommit = nonce * generatorG + nonceBlinding * generatorH
# The tag was correctly computed using m1 and the nonce
4. T = m1 * tag + nonce * tag, where T = G.HashToGroup(presentationContext, "Tag")
# The nonce is in the range [0, presentationLimit)

> 5. constraints added by the range proof. See {#range-proof}.

Reviewer: Does this citation render correctly?

  - UPrimeCommit: Element, a public key to the issued UPrime.
  - m1Commit: Element, a public key to the client secret (m1).
  - tag: Element, the tag element used for enforcing the presentation limit.
  - nonceCommit: Element, a Pedersen commitment to the nonce.

>   - D: [Element], array of commitments to the bit decomposition of nonceCommit

Reviewer: Can we make this name more informative? Maybe `bitCommits` or something?

~~~

## Range Proof for Arbitrary Values {#range-proof}

This section specifies a range proof to prove a secret value `nonce` lies
in an arbitrary interval `[0, presentationLimit)`. Before specifying the proof system, we first
give a brief overview of how it works. For simplicity, assume that `presentationLimit` is a
power of two, that is, `presentationLimit == 2^k` for some `k`.

To prove a value lies in `[0,(2^k)-1)`, we prove it has a valid `k`-bit representation.
This is proven by committing to the full value `nonce`, then all bits of the bit decomposition
`b` of the value `nonce`, and then proving each coefficient of the bit decomposition is
actually `0` or `1` and that the sum of the bits amounts to the full value `nonce`.
This involves the following steps:

1. Commit to the bits of `nonce`. That is, for each bit `b[i]` of the bit decomposition of `nonce`,
let `D[i] = b[i] * generatorG + s[i] * generatorH`, where `s[i]` is a blinding scalar.
2. Prove that `b[i]` is in `{0,1}` by proving the algebraic relation `b[i] *
(b[i]-1) == 0` holds. This quadratic relation can be linearized by
adding an auxilary witness `s2[i]` and adding the linear relation

> `D[i] == b[i] * D[i] + s2[i] * generatorH` to the equation system. A valid witness `s2[i]` can only

Author: Added the equation for computing `s2`!

~~~

The third step is verified outside of the proof by adding the commitments
homomorphically.

To support the general case, where `presentationLimit` is not necessarily a power of two,
we extend the range proof for arbitrary ranges by decomposing the range
up to the second highest power of two and adding an additional, non-binary range that
covers the remaining range. This is detailed in `ComputeBases` below.

~~~
bases = ComputeBases(presentationLimit)

Inputs:
- presentationLimit: Integer, the maximum value of the range (exclusive).

Outputs:
- bases: an array of Scalar bases to represent elements, sorted in descending order. A base is
  either a power of two or a unique remainder that can be used to represent any integer
  in [0, presentationLimit).

def ComputeBases(presentationLimit):
  # compute bases to express the commitment as a linear combination of the bit decomposition
  remainder=presentationLimit
  bases=[]
  # Generate all but the last power-of-two base.
  for i in range(ceil(log2(presentationLimit)) - 1):
      base = 2 ** i
      remainder -= base
      bases.append(G.Scalar(base))
  bases.append(remainder - 1)

>   # call sorted on array to ensure the additional base is in correct order

Author: That's a good question - for consistency, it would be preferable for all spec-compliant implementations to use the canonical ordering that we define in ComputeBases.

However, if they use an alternative representation, the range proof is still a valid range proof, and would verify correctly (since the verifier has no way to know if they used the canonical or alternative representation; all it can check is that the constraints were satisfied). So we can't actually force rejection of alternative (but still valid) representations, in the verification process. 

Maybe that's okay though, we can still say that spec-compliant implementations need to follow the canonical representation. I'll add that.

  m1CommitVar = verifier.AppendElement("m1Commit", presentation.m1Commit)
  VVar = verifier.AppendElement("V", V)
  X1Var = verifier.AppendElement("X1", serverPublicKey.X1)
  tagVar = verifier.AppendElement("tag", presentation.tag)
  genTVar = verifier.AppendElement("genT", generatorT)
  nonceCommitVar = verifier.AppendElement("nonceCommit", presentation.nonceCommit)

  # 1. m1Commit = m1 * U + z * generatorH
  verifier.Constrain(m1CommitVar, [(m1Var, UVar), (zVar, genHVar)])
  # 2. V = z * X1 - r * generatorG
  verifier.Constrain(VVar, [(zVar, X1Var), (rNegVar, genGVar)])
  # 3. nonceCommit = nonce * generatorG + nonceBlinding * generatorH
  verifier.Constrain(nonceCommitVar, [(nonceVar, genGVar), (nonceBlindingVar, genHVar)])
  # 4. G.HashToGroup(presentationContext, "Tag") = m1 * tag + nonce * tag
  verifier.Constrain(genTVar, [(m1Var, tagVar), (nonceVar, tagVar)])
  # 5. Add range proof constraints and verify the sum of the nonceCommit bit commitments
  (verifier, sumValid) = VerifyRangeProofHelper(verifier, presentation.D, presentation.nonceCommit,
                                                presentationLimit, genGVar, genHVar)

>   if not sumValid:

Reviewer 2: here we can hint that this checking must run after `verifier.Verify` has been completed for the sake of running in constant-time

Author: That's not strictly necessary, because `sumValid` is a computation over public data: the bit decomposition commitments, and the total value commitment. So exiting early if `sumValid` is false doesn't reveal any secret data.

But to follow good practice, I will combine the two checks into one.

~~~
nonceCommit = D[0] * 2^0 + D[1] * 2^1 + D[2] * 2^2 + ... + D[k-1] * 2^{k-1}
~~~

The third step is verified outside of the proof by adding the commitments
homomorphically.

To support the general case, where `presentationLimit` is not necessarily a power of two,
we extend the range proof for arbitrary ranges by decomposing the range
up to the second highest power of two and adding an additional, non-binary range that
covers the remaining range. This is detailed in `ComputeBases` below.

~~~
bases = ComputeBases(presentationLimit)

Inputs:
- presentationLimit: Integer, the maximum value of the range (exclusive).

Outputs:
- bases: an array of Scalar bases to represent elements, sorted in descending order. A base is
  either a power of two or a unique remainder that can be used to represent any integer
  in [0, presentationLimit).

def ComputeBases(presentationLimit):
  # compute bases to express the commitment as a linear combination of the bit decomposition
  remainder = presentationLimit
  bases = []
  k = ceil(log2(presentationLimit))
  # Generate all but the last power-of-two base.
  for i in range(k - 1):
      base = 2 ** i
      remainder -= base
      bases.append(base)

>   bases.append(remainder - 1)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  bases.append(remainder - 1) # add non-binary base to close the gap
```

  # call sorted on array to ensure the additional base is in correct order
  return sorted(bases, reverse=True)
~~~

> Note that by extending the range proof for arbitrary ranges, we are changing the bases used for decomposition and therefore introducing the potential for multiple valid decompositions of a value (the nonce). Spec-compliant implementations need to follow the canonical decomposition defined in {{range-proof-creation}}.

Reviewer 2: either `must` or `MUST`. not sure which one the is adequate in this case

```suggestion
Note that by extending the range proof for arbitrary ranges, we are changing the bases used for decomposition and therefore introducing the potential for multiple valid decompositions of a value (the nonce). Implementations compliant with this specification MUST to follow the canonical decomposition defined in {{range-proof-creation}}.
```

range proof constraints to the presentation proof statement.

~~~
(prover, D) = MakeRangeProofHelper(prover, nonce, nonceBlinding, presentationLimit,
                                   genGVar, genHVar)

Inputs:
- prover: Prover statement to which constraints will be added
- nonce: Integer, the nonce value to prove is in range
- nonceBlinding: Scalar, the blinding factor for the nonce commitment
- presentationLimit: Integer, the maximum value of the range (exclusive).
- genGVar: Integer, variable index for generator G
- genHVar: Integer, variable index for generator H

Outputs:
- prover: Modified prover statement with range proof constraints added
- D: [Element], array of commitments to the bit decomposition of nonceCommit

Parameters:
- G: Group
- generatorG: Element, equivalent to G.GeneratorG()
- generatorH: Element, equivalent to G.GeneratorH()

def MakeRangeProofHelper(prover, nonce, nonceBlinding, presentationLimit,
                         genGVar, genHVar):

  # Compute bit decomposition and commitments
  bases = ComputeBases(presentationLimit)

  # Compute bit decomposition of nonce
  b = []
  remainder = nonce

>   # must run in constant-time (branching depends on secret value)

Author: Ah good catch, updated!
